# Basic Concepts

G1 is a generational, incremental, parallel, mostly concurrent, stop-the-world, and evacuating  
garbage collector which monitors pause-time goals in each of the stop-the-world pauses.  
G1 splits the heap into (virtual) young and old generations.  
Collections concentrate on the young generation (most efficient).

Some operations performed in stop-the-world pauses, other, like global marking are performed  
concurrently. 
To keep pauses short, G1 performs space-reclamation incrementally 
in steps and in parallel. G1 achieves predictability by tracking information about previous 
application behavior and garbage collection pauses to build a model of the associated costs. It 
uses this information to size the work done in the pauses. For example, G1 reclaims space in the 
most efficient areas first (that is the areas that are mostly filled with garbage, therefore the name).

G1 reclaims space mostly by using evacuation: live objects copied into new memory areas and compacted.  
After an evacuation has been completed, the space previously occupied by live objects is reused.

The Garbage-First collector is not a real-time collector. It tries to meet set pause-time targets 
with high probability over a longer time, but not always with absolute certainty for a given pause.

# Heap Layout

G1 partitions the heap into a set of equally sized heap regions.   
At any given time, each of these regions can be empty, or assigned young or old generation.  
As requests for memory comes in, the memory manager assigns free regions to a generation and then returns them  
to the application as free space into which it can allocate itself.

The young generation contains eden regions and survivor regions.
Old generation regions may be humongous (objects that span multiple regions).

An application always allocates into a young generation (eden regions), with the exception 
of humongous (directly allocated to the old generation).

G1 can reclaim space in the young generation and old generation regions at any collection pause.  
The destination region depends on the source region: 
 -  young generation is copied into either survivor or old regions
 -  old regions to other, different old regions using aging.

# Garbage Collection Cycle

G1 alternates between two phases.
  
The young-only phase:  garbage collections that fill up the currently available memory with objects in the old generation.  

The space-reclamation phase: G1 reclaims space in the old generation incrementally, in addition to the young generation.  
Then the cycle restarts with a young-only phase.

### G1 garbage collection phases:

#### Young-only phase: 

This phase starts with young-only collections that promote objects into the old generation. 
The transition between the young-only phase and the space-reclamation 
phase starts when the old generation occupancy reaches a certain threshold, the Initiating Heap Occupancy threshold.  
At this time, G1 schedules an Initial Mark young-only collection instead of a regular young-only collection.

#### Initial Mark: 
This collection starts the marking process in addition to performing young-only collection.  
Concurrent marking determines all currently reachable (live) objects in the old generation regions to be kept for the following 
space-reclamation phase. While marking hasn’t completely finished, regular young 
collections may occur. Marking finishes with two special stop-the-world pauses: 
Remark and Cleanup.

#### Remark: 
This pause finalizes the marking, and performs global reference processing and 
class unloading. Between Remark and Cleanup G1 calculates a summary of the liveness information 
concurrently, which will be finalized and used in the Cleanup pause.

#### Cleanup: 
This pause also reclaims empty regions, and determines a space-reclamation phase.  
If a space-reclamation phase follows, the young-only phase completes with a single young-only collection.

#### Space-reclamation phase: 
This phase consists of multiple mixed collections that in addition 
to young generation regions, also evacuate live objects of sets of old generation regions. 
The space-reclamation phase ends when G1 determines that evacuating more old generation regions 
wouldn't yield enough free space worth the effort.

After space-reclamation, the collection cycle restarts with another young-only phase. As backup, 
if the application runs out of memory while gathering liveness information, G1 performs an in-place 
stop-the-world full heap compaction (Full GC) like other collectors.

# Garbage-First Internals

### The Initiating Heap Occupancy Percent (IHOP)

threshold(percentage of the old generation size) at which an Initial Mark collection is triggered and it is defined as a percentage.

G1 by default automatically determines an optimal IHOP. 
This feature is called Adaptive IHOP. Option -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent determines the initial value  
as a percentage of the size of the current old generation as long as there aren't enough observations to make 
a good prediction of the Initiating Heap Occupancy threshold. 
Can be disabled using option-XX:-G1UseAdaptiveIHOP.

### Snapshot-At-The-Beginning (SATB)
G1 marking uses an algorithm called Snapshot-At-The-Beginning (SATB) . It takes a virtual snapshot 
of the heap at the time of the Initial Mark pause, when all objects that were live at the start 
of marking are considered live for the remainder of marking.

### Humongous objects 
objects larger or equal the size of half a region. The current region size 
is determined ergonomically as described in the Ergonomic Defaults for G1 GC section, 
unless set using the -XX:G1HeapRegionSize option.
These humongous objects are sometimes treated in special ways:

Every humongous object gets allocated as a sequence of contiguous regions in the old generation. 
The start of the object itself is always located at the start of the first region in that sequence. 
Any leftover space in the last region of the sequence will be lost for allocation until 
the entire object is reclaimed.
Generally, humongous objects can be reclaimed only at the end of marking during the Cleanup pause, 
or during Full GC if they became unreachable.

### Young-Only Phase Generation Sizing

During the young-only phase, the set of regions to collect (collection set), consists only 
of young generation regions. G1 always sizes the young generation at the end of 
a young-only collection. This way, G1 can meet the pause time goals that were set using 
-XX:MaxGCPauseTimeMillis and -XX:PauseTimeIntervalMillis based on long-term observations of actual 
pause time. It takes into account how long it took young generations of similar size to evacuate. 
This includes information like how many objects had to be copied during collection, 
and how interconnected these objects had been.

If not otherwise constrained, then G1 adaptively sizes the young generation size between the 
values that -XX:G1NewSizePercent and -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent determine to meet pause-time. 
See Garbage-First Garbage Collector Tuning  for more information about how to fix long pauses.
Space-Reclamation Phase Generation Sizing

During the space-reclamation phase, G1 tries to maximize the amount of space that's reclaimed 
in the old generation in a single garbage collection pause. The size of the young generation is 
set to minimum allowed, typically as determined by -XX:G1NewSizePercent, and any old generation 
regions to reclaim space are added until G1 determines that adding further regions will exceed 
the pause time goal. In a particular garbage collection pause, G1 adds old generation regions 
in order of their reclamation efficiency, highest first, and the remaining available time 
to get the final collection set.

The number of old generation regions to take per garbage collection is bounded at the lower end by 
the number of potential candidate old generation regions (collection set candidate regions) 
to collect, divided by the length of the space-reclamation phase as determined 
by -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget. The collection set candidate regions are all old generation regions 
that have an occupancy that's lower than -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent at the start of the phase.


| Option and Default Value | Description |
| ------------------------ | ----------- |
| -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=200 | The goal for the maximum pause time. |
| -XX:GCPauseTimeInterval=<ergo> | The goal for the maximum pause time interval. By default G1 doesn’t set any goal, allowing G1 to perform garbage collections back-to-back in extreme cases. |
| -XX:ParallelGCThreads=<ergo> | The maximum number of threads used for parallel work during garbage collection pauses. This is derived from the number of available threads of the computer that the VM runs on in the following way: if the number of CPU threads available to the process is fewer than or equal to 8, use that. Otherwise add five eighths of the threads greater than to the final number of threads.
| -XX:ConcGCThreads=<ergo> | The maximum number of threads used for concurrent work. By default, this value is -XX:ParallelGCThreads divided by 4.
| -XX:+G1UseAdaptiveIHOP & -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent=45 | Defaults for controlling the initiating heap occupancy indicate that adaptive determination of that value is turned on, and that for the first few collection cycles G1 will use an occupancy of 45% of the old generation as mark start threshold. |
| -XX:G1HeapRegionSize=<ergo> | The set of the heap region size based on initial and maximum heap size. So that heap contains roughly 2048 heap regions. The size of a heap region can vary from 1 to 32 MB, and must be a power of 2. |
| -XX:G1NewSizePercent=5 & -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent=60 | The size of the young generation in total, which varies between these two values as percentages of the current Java heap in use. |
| -XX:G1HeapWastePercent=5 | The allowed unreclaimed space in the collection set candidates as a percentage. G1 stops the space-reclamation phase if the free space in the collection set candidates is lower than that. |
| -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget=8 | The expected length of the space-reclamation phase in a number of collections. |
| -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent=85 | Old generation regions with higher live object occupancy than this percentage aren't collected in this space-reclamation phase. |